---
layout: default
title: Chapter 2
---

# 2 - eBooks

Is an eBook right for you? Digital publishing in the form of an eBook is
popular, but it may not necessarily be the best route for you. This section
highlights the main benefits and drawbacks of this approach to help you
decide.

Electronic books (or eBooks) are one of the [fastest growing markets in the
world](http://paidcontent.org/2011/08/09/419-new-stats-book-publishing-
industry-is-growing-with-e-books-up-over-1000/). The graph below shows the
revenue growth in the US alone (if you don’t like graphs, let me assure you
it’s impressive).

<img src="/img/ebookrevenue.jpg" class="align-center" />

Image courtesy of [International Digital Publishing Forum](http://idpf.org
/about-us/industry-statistics)

Growth like this can’t be ignored, so why the amazing boom in interest? Well,
there are numerous advantages to publishing your own eBook over traditional
methods, which, amazingly, is forcing established publishers to change their
attitude to authors or risk being frozen out.

<a name="chapter2_1" />

## 2:1 - Pros and Cons of Publishing an eBook

### Advantages

####Instant revisions

Once you publish a hard copy book, any updates or revisions you want to make
will need to be via a new edition. eBooks have no such limitation as any
revision is uploaded to the necessary websites to keep the content fresh and
updated. Even better, anyone who has downloaded your eBook will be given the
option to update to the new edition once it is released, keeping everyone up
to speed.

If you’re all about the profits, you can choose to charge for an update to
your eBook. This allows you to profit from any work which will naturally be
expanded upon, for example an educational textbook.

####Higher profit margins

At time of writing, the returns you can expect to enjoy from your eBook sales
via the top retailers are as follows:

* Amazon **70%**
* Smashwords **85%**
* iTunes / iBook store **70%**
* Lulu **56%**

Rather better than the 17.5% an author receives from traditional publishing
routes.

####Longer shelf life

Physical books enjoy a month or two on a book store’s shelf before being
confined to the lesser-read sections. Internet shelves have no such problem.
As long as your book is listed on the website, it will have the same page and
listing details for years to come.

####Reviews

People buy from people, and an internet store can show product reviews far
better than a physical book. If you can accumulate reviews from readers that
are largely positive, then bingo, that will drive more sales.

Please note this is a double edged sword, and negative reviews will be much
clearer. However, if you track these properly you can easily create a dialogue
with your customers and respond to their criticisms.

####Price it how you want

Unless you sign away the pricing rights to a digital publisher, you can charge
what you want for your eBook. If you want to gain attention and readership by
slashing the price to 99p per download you can!

####Adjustable font

If you buy a physical book and you can’t read it, you’re stuck. Digital
readers and eBooks let you adjust the font size, font types, background, the
lot! If I want to read the latest best-seller in Arial 24 with a pink
background, I’m in luck!

####Immediate Delivery

Once someone buys a book online, they have access to it on their e-readers,
wherever they go. There’s something glorious about lying in bed, wanting a
book, and being able to buy it without moving.

### Drawbacks

####Illegal sharing

We all know it happens, and the downloading issue that is so prevalent in the
music and film industry applies to any digital asset. Digital books can be
shared with others relatively easily via email or free ftp sites, and can
obviously reach levels that the typical lending of a printed book to a friend
never could.

####Pricing

Though you have control of the pricing, the websites you choose to sell
through may limit the range of prices you can apply. For example, if you sell
a book through Amazon or Apple iBookstore, their terms and conditions forbid
you from listing the book at a lower price on any other website.

At the time of writing this guide, eBook sellers are actually in a legal
battle regarding price-fixing and collusion on eBook pricing. We couldn’t
think of anything more apt to sum up the possible risks in eBook pricing than
[this article from CBCNews](http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/story/2012/03/09
/ebook-price-fixing.html).

####‘Limited’ market

Any literate person can pick up a physical book and start to read, as long as
they can get their hands on the book. With eBooks however, If someone does not
have an e-reader or similar device (such as an iPad), an eBook won’t be of
much use or interest. Unless they’re a fan of reading on a PC, but we don’t
know many people that consume books that way!

<a name="chapter2_2" />

## 2:2 - Publishing your own eBook

Regardless of how you choose to pursue your own book, you’ll need to have the
basics in place, which were covered in Chapter 1. (link to chapter 1).

Okay great, you’ve proofread your work, had an editor give it the once over
and you’re good to go.... so what next? We’ve broken down the important
considerations for anyone looking at how to publish an eBook, with links to
recommended companies and offers where appropriate.

If you have access to Twitter, a great place to start is following the hashtag
[#ePrdctn](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23eprdctn), which is a dedicated
topic discussing how to publish an eBook.

### The cover design

Don’t underestimate the value of a book cover, especially in the world of
eBooks. Unless potential readers land directly on your dedicated web page,
you’re going to be sitting on a virtual shelf with hundreds of other books.
It’s all too easy for someone to skip to another shelf with a single click, or
for your book to get filtered in, or out, depending on search terms.

Due to this, first impression is key! Web designers are forever told they have
three seconds to make an impression on a visitor or they will leave, and your
book will be working under the same pressure. You’ve put blood, sweat and
tears into your book, so don’t skimp on the presentation side.

You are going to need a cover image, typically in JPEG format. This image, in
the vast majority of cases, will be a vertical rectangle shape, at least 600
pixels in height. We’d advise the cover has both the book title and author
name on it, but ultimately that decision is up to you.

Even with this set size, it is absolutely crucial your cover is also clear in
a smaller, thumbnail format. When people browse online eBook catalogues your
book will often be shown in this thumbnail size, and any loss of clarity will
severely hamper its effect.

The cover image has got to be “socially acceptable” too, so try to avoid
nudity or anything you would be uncomfortable seeing in a PG-13 film.

You can either create this cover with your own images and graphics, or go
through an agency or freelance that specialises in book design. If you DIY or
opt to use a gifted friend looking to expand their portfolio, do make sure you
run it by a professional before committing to that cover as the final design.

####Companies that design book covers

* [2H Design](http://www.nedof2h.net/)
* [Lulu Book Cover Design](http://www.lulu.com/shop/service/product-basiccover.html)
* [The Book Design](http://www.thebookdesign.co.uk/)
* [Spiffing Covers](http://www.spiffingcovers.com/)

We got in touch with these companies when publishing this guide, and [Spiffing
Covers](http://www.spiffingcovers.com/) were kind enough to get back to us and
offer a 25% discount for any customers who get in touch and quote “Stinkyink”
to them. Bargain!

You might be able to find a better price, for slightly more effort on your
part, by browsing the two freelancers’ websites below for potential designers.
Most responses will be from overseas. Remember to be careful with your
selection. For example, does the designer have experience of what works with
books, or does he/she speak fluent English.

* [eLance](http://www.elance.com/)
* [PeoplePerHour](http://www.peopleperhour.com/)

### eBook file formats

eBooks don’t just come in one file format, meaning certain eBooks can’t be
read on different devices. This can be pretty frustrating for anyone looking
to produce their own volume, as you’ll need an eBook in multiple formats.

####To give you an idea of how convoluted the eBook format world is...

<img src="/img/ebookformats.jpg" class="align-center" />

Figures courtesy of [manybooks.net](http://www.manybooks.net)

Thankfully, you won’t need to cover all of these formats, and you’ll only need
three formats to cover the majority of the e-reader market:

* ePub
* PDF
* Amazon Kindle ( .azw).

Nearly every popular e-reader, including Apple iBook, accepts the ePub format
which makes it a very popular choice of file. The only noticeable exception
that does not accept ePub (at time of writing) is the Amazon Kindle. This
means you’ll also need to create an .azw edition. Supplement this with a PDF
for any computer or web-based readers and you’re good to go!

There is a separate format dedicated to the Apple book store, .ibook, but the
Apple e-readers all accept ePub so it’s not really necessary at the moment.
This is compounded by the fact that Apple actually forbid you to sell a book
in the .ibook format through another store, which at time of writing makes it
superfluous.

### Useful contacts

There are companies around that will either assist or fully convert one eBook
format to another.

We’ve picked some reliable companies below that offer the services you need
for certain formats.

If you want any additional information about converting to the ePub format
before committing to one of these companies, [check out this great array of
tips](http://connect.lulu.com/t5/eBook-Formatting-Publishing/eBook-Creator-
Guide/ta-p/109443):

* ####[Lulu](http://www.lulu.com/uk/publish/ebooks/?cid=nav_ebks)

  Useful for converting to the ePub format, it is a very helpful company, with
  good customer service (though it’s on American east coast time, so -5 hours)
  and very clear website design. You can pay Lulu a one-time fee and you won’t
  pay them any additional commissions, which might be worthwhile.

* ####[2EPub](http://www.2epub.com/)

  If you’re looking for a simple, quick solution to your format conversion, this
  is the website for you. Supporting most common format types, including .doc
  and .docx (Microsoft Word), .txt (nearly any text editors) and .pdf, you
  simply upload your file, specify the book name, author and file type, hit
  convert and then download your new shiny ePub format file.

* ####[Amazon Kindle Direct Publishing](https://kdp.amazon.com/self-publishing/help?topicId=A2RYO17TIRUIVI)

  Amazon has created one of the most comprehensive and clear services we have
  ever seen. If you’re looking to convert a book into the Kindle format,
  everything you need to know can be found on this publishing site.

* ####[Hamster eBook Converter](http://ebook.hamstersoft.com/home)

  If you like hamsters, and like writing books, you’ve found your dream piece of
  software. It’s a free download and a great little converter.

* ####[Calibre eBook](http://calibre-ebook.com)

  Slightly more complicated but worthwhile nonetheless if you’re looking to
  convert eBook formats. This software is not only a converter but it also
  serves as a great library tool for archiving your own collections of eBooks.

### Where to publish an eBook

Now you’ve got your nice shiny eBook in all of its glorious formats, it’s time
to get it onto those digital shelves. There are countless eBook stores on the
internet, so deciding where to sell your work can be tricky.

We’ve listed the most important places below, which should be the minimum you
look at being listed on. After these you may want to then go out and list
yourself on others, but start with these recommended sites..

* ####[Amazon](https://kdp.amazon.com/self-publishing/signin)

    Expected return per sale: 70%

    Check out [CreateSpace](https://www.createspace.com/), a service provided by
    Amazon to help advise prospective writers on how to publish for them.

* ####[Apple iBookstore](https://itunesconnect.apple.com/WebObjects/iTunesConnect.woa/wa/bookSignup)

  Expected return per sale: 70%

* ####[Lulu](http://www.lulu.com/publish/ebooks/)

  Expected return per sale: 56%

* ####[Clickbank](http://www.clickbank.com/sell_products.html)

  Expected return per sale: Differs per price.

  Clickbank makes 7.5% per transaction plus $1. You will earn whatever’s left
  after this amount, minus whatever you choose to give to any affiliates set up
  with Clickbank.

* ####[Barnes and Noble](http://pubit.barnesandnoble.com/pubit_app/bn?t=pi_reg_home)

  Expected return per sale: 65% on books between $2.99 and $9.99. 40% on all
  other book prices.

* ####[FetchApp](http://www.fetchapp.com/)

    If you are a bit techy, and fancy keeping the biggest chunk of the profits for
    yourself, you can take out the middleman and sell directly from your own
    website. Set up your own [Shopify](http://Shopify.com) website, use the
    FetchApp plugin, and they’ll automatically email your customers a download
    link when they buy your book.

That should be everything you need to get your best-seller launched and on to
people’s e-readers in no time at all.

If you do need any help along the way, either check out the very good help
sections on the websites we’ve recommended, send an email to [info@stinkyink.c
om](mailto:info@stinkyink.com?subject=book+publishing+guide+question), or post
a comment and we’ll do our best to help.

<a name="chapter2_3" />

## 2:3 - Using an Assisted Publisher

A digital publisher is one where all of the major considerations, such as
cover design, proofreading, etc. are done for you in the same way a
traditional publisher would. Though you still retain control over how your
book progresses, the majority of the work and organisation is done by the
publisher.

Also known as ‘assisted eBook publishing’, this method is perfect for
individuals with limited time on their hands who are happy to pay for a
comprehensive service. Indeed, with time in short supply these days, and if it
is your first venture into self-publishing, then having a professional to
organise proofreading, cover designs and format considerations could make the
difference between you actually launching your book or not.

### There are downfalls though.

The cost of a digital publisher will increase your overheads, as they supply
the expertise in all of the necessary fields when producing your book.

You will earn lower rates on any sales of your book with a digital publisher.
This can have serious impacts on the long-term value of your eBook, as this
agreed rate will last for the life of the book, long past when that assisted
publisher put the effort into publishing your work. Some digital publishers
will offer a contract with a termination date, which is preferable, but still
something to be wary of.

Due to this, we would always recommend keeping control of your eBook as far as
possible, and only bringing in assisted publishing if absolutely necessary.

### How do I go down the assisted self publishing route?

Before you go any further, have you read chapter 1 on how to prepare your own
book (link to chapter 1)?

There are countless digital publishers who will be happy to help you publish
your own eBook. The list below is nowhere near comprehensive, and is simply
some top recommended companies we think go above and beyond the resources they
have to provide. You could happily load these websites and learn a tremendous
amount without ever publishing through them, which we consider a brilliant way
to treat possible customers.

### Useful contacts

* ####[Lulu](http://www.lulu.com/uk/publish/ebooks/?cid=nav_ebks)

  This helpful American company has a good website. Apple retains 30% of all
  revenue from sales through Lulu. The publisher (that’s you) receives 80% of
  the remaining 70% of revenue and Lulu receives 20%. Or you can pay Lulu a one-
  time fee and you won’t pay them any additional commissions, which might be
  worthwhile.

* ####[iUniverse](http://www.iuniverse.com/)

    A fantastic digital publishing website that has tips and tricks for nearly
    everything you need to know. With marketing guides for self-publishers, an
    active and helpful community, plus an incredibly helpful “Expert Advice”
    section, iUniverse is a great resource even if you don’t publish through them.

* ####[AuthorHouse](http://www.authorhouse.com/default.aspx)

  Another helpful website with a comprehensive resource section, community and
  clear pricing structure.

* ####[Writer’s Digest](http://www.writersdigest.com/)

  This website is dedicated to pointing you in the right direction if you’re
  looking for publishing or writing assistance. With recommended companies and
  educational materials, it’s definitely worth a look.

### Tips for selecting your digital publisher

Don’t forget to try and grab a bargain when you’ve decided on your publisher.
They frequently run special offers, and even if one’s expired it’s always
worth enquiring about the possibility of qualifying for it.

Also make sure to compare packages, and the features within these packages.
These companies ultimately make money from their service, and not how many
books you sell. They’re going to try and sell you things you don’t need, so
run through the feature set with a fine-tooth comb and make sure that what
you’re paying for is what you want!

There’s a great resource over on the website [Absolute
Write](http://absolutewrite.com/forums/forumdisplay.php?f=22), which helps you
check up on digital publishers and if anyone has ever had an issue with them

If you’re not interested in other methods of publication and are ready to go,
check out our tips for marketing your book in chapter 4.
