---
layout: default
title: Chapter 1
---

# 1 - How to prepare a book for publishing

So, you’ve got your book idea and you’re looking to make things happen. Unless
you’re gifted at writing flawless prose, your book is going to need some
external care and attention, i.e. editing.

We’ve researched and pulled together all of the best advice from experts in
the publishing and book reviews fields. It doesn’t guarantee success, but
following these pointers is a first step in getting your idea into the hands
of readers, whether it’s via eBook or hard copy.

## Proofreading and copy editing

It’s incredibly difficult to proofread your own work. You’ll subconsciously
remember how the sentences end, where the story is going, and won’t notice the
niggling errors that have crept in.

This is especially important if you’re pursuing the print publishing route, as
you only get one chance to make a first impression with a publisher. As Oscar
Wilde famously said, A poet can survive everything but a misprint.

If you’ve got a friend or two who can write well, then ask if they will review
your work. This can give you both a proofreading service and feedback on your
style of writing, for free.

However, for anyone seriously looking at publishing a book a proofreader or
editor is essential to ensure you’re submitting the highest quality document
that does your work and creativity justice. For a general idea of cost, a
10,000 word short story will be looking at around £80-120, and a full novel in
excess of 100,000 words will often start from £300.

For information on what you can expect from a professional editor, [check out
this amazing resource](http://web.me.com/karlweberliterary/Consulting_Editors_
Alliance/FAQs.html) from a group of New York publishers with over 15 years
experience apiece.

Remember to double check exactly what the proofreading or editing service is
offering you, as some companies’ definitions or features will differ. Finding
an editor who has experience in the field you are writing about is vital, as
they’ll have knowledge of other work available in that genre which they can
use as a benchmark.

**Top tip:** Approaching teachers or academics outside term time can lead to a great proof read at an excellent price.

### Recommended proofreading & editing companies

* ####[Scribendi.com](http://www.scribendi.com/)

Scribendi provides professional proofreading and editing services for any
length of book. They’ve given us permission to list a special introductory
offer where you can get up to 1,500 words proofed free to see the quality of
their service. [We love free trials and heartily recommend giving it a go
here!](https://www.scribendi.com/service/free_sample_edit_book_manuscripts)

* ####[Bubblecow.co.uk](http://bubblecow.co.uk/)

If you’re looking for simple pricing and upfront honesty, bubblecow is a great
little company. There are three clearly segmented packages so you can pick the
depth of editing you want, and the pricing and time of delivery are clear.

* ####[Proofers.co.uk](http://www.proofers.co.uk/)

Though it’s frustrating having to register before receiving a quotation, this
website is nice and clear with its [pricing
information](http://www.proofers.co.uk/pricing.html), [turnaround
time](http://www.proofers.co.uk/pricing.html) and each stage of the editing
process.

## Tax tips for writers

No one enjoys talking about taxes, but it’s a fairly crucial part of the
publishing process, both for those looking for a career or those simply using
writing as a hobby.

It can be complicated to decide even the most basic things, such as “What is
tax deductible?” There’s a [great little guide
here](http://www.scribendi.com/advice/tax_tips_for_writers.en.html) which
should point you in the right direction for your tax considerations.

## Avoiding plagiarism

Even novels can plagiarise, so it’s important to keep a clear record of
everything you do related to your book. For a work of fiction, note down any
resources you used which you can then include in your book’s acknowledgements.
Non-fiction books will need clear footnotes and endnotes of every resource,
study or quotation that is present in your work.

Take care that you don’t inadvertently copy/steal/borrow any ideas from
existing works in your genre. Even if it truly was your idea, proving this to
a court with a scribbled note of when the idea came to you won’t stand up well
against an existing book with the same idea.

Read around your target genre and get inspiration, but always ensure your book
retains a unique side that is yours, and only yours.

A [comprehensive guide to all kinds of
referencing](http://www.proofers.co.uk/pricing.html) can be found here which
will give you everything you need to know!

## Copyright

Three cheers for copyright, it’s free! Copyright needs to be considered in two
forms:

1. when can you breach others’ copyright
2. how to deal with people violating your copyright. 

### Avoiding breaching others’ copyright

On the whole it’s very difficult to breach copyright unless you’re actively
trying to reproduce someone else’s work. Most fiction writers shouldn’t have
to worry and those trying to parody an existing work can actually use a
surprising amount of the original.

It’s worth noting that facts cannot be covered by copyright, but the way those
facts are presented can be. Turning to our experience with printers for an
example, there are a number of publicly available facts about HP ink
cartridges which you're free to use however you please. But if my company were
to take these figures, present them differently or relate them to some other
knowledge, you could not copy our interpretation.

Non-fiction writers are more likely to run foul of plagiarism. It’s an issue
taken seriously by academic institutions and employers, so you need to be very
careful about how you reference other works in your own. A [comprehensive
guide to all kinds of referencing](http://www.proofers.co.uk/pricing.html) can
be found here which will give you everything you need to know!

### Protecting your own works

There’s a great [breakdown of copyright
information](http://www.whatiscopyright.org/) here which should give you a
good idea of what’s acceptable, and what’s not.

To quickly summarise the important points of copyrighting your work:

####Mark your work as copyrighted.

The rationale being that it makes a potential infringer think that you take
the issue seriously.

####Keep evidence of your work as it develops

This can be done through a number of established companies who will register
your copyright for a small fee or by keeping notes and old drafts to show an
“evolution” of your ideas.

Ultimately, it’s far more likely you’ll experience an eBook copy of your book
being shared illegally than a physical copy. There are [some clear steps to
take](http://www.copyrightservice.co.uk/copyright/p05_copyright_infringement)
if you feel your work is being illegally shared.

This doesn’t really cover peer-to-peer file sharing, which you’re probably all
aware of from the issues in the music industry with illegal downloading. This
is far more difficult to stop, but there are some common sense approaches to
limiting the potential occurrences:

### Does it matter?

<img src="/img/pirate.png" class="align-right" />
File sharing in small numbers is not too dissimilar to one
person buying your book then passing it on when they’re finished. Ultimately
it still generates word of mouth and possible reviews, and not many authors
mind about that.

In fact, many ‘pirates’ go on to write reviews and often purchase your book
later, so a little illegal activity may turn out to be good marketing.

### Is there a reason people are taking your work without paying?

Taking a common sense approach to the mindset of a file sharer can actually
highlight the root cause which can be addressed.

For example, [check out this research into the movie and film
industry](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Ftorrentfreak.com
%2Fbittorrent-piracy-doesnt-affect-us-box-office-returns-study-
finds-120210%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNE7ukXDqrhReL9QcuKReo0lCj8w_A), an
industry that is heavily hit by illegal file sharing. This research highlights
a tremendous correlation between films having a split release date, between
the Americas and Europe, and the number of times it is illegally shared.

Though not particularly relevant for eBook file sharing, it highlights how
consideration of your target market can lead to increased gains for you and a
limitation on illegal activity.

Take a simple example of pricing. Is your book extortionate compared to
similar books in your area? What about availability, can your book be
purchased from numerous vendors or is it actually difficult to get hold of?

If you think this may be the case, consider offers like giving away the first
chapter of your book as a teaser. Little things like that can make the
difference, but we’ll discuss these more in our book marketing tips!

### Further copyright resources...

There are a number of resources you can go to for further information about
copyright. Some educational institutes such as
[Columbia](http://copyright.columbia.edu/copyright/copyright-in-general
/copyright-quickguide/) and [Stanford](http://copyright.columbia.edu/copyright
/copyright-in-general/copyright-quickguide/) provide excellent guides that
cover most areas of the law. There are also some
[charities](http://www.educause.edu/Resources/Browse/Copyright/17092) who also
offer insight.

If you’re looking for advice and current happenings in the realms of online
property (which as a potential eBook author you ought to be) the
[EFF](https://www.eff.org/) is an interesting charity to keep an eye on.

**Please note:** We in no way endorse illegal file sharing, but there are certain ‘market benefits’ to distributing your work for free.

## DRM

Digital Rights Management (DRM) is a technology that helps you limit the use
of your digital contents once it has been purchased, and is an important
consideration for anyone looking to publish an eBook.

An example of a DRM restriction is to limit the ‘cut and paste’ function in a
document.

To be honest, DRM below the level of the Stephen Kings of this world is
probably not something worth paying much attention to at present. At its
worst, DRM is often broken very swiftly, and can quite often annoy and
alienate your fans by restricting what they can do with a product they’ve
purchased.

If you require any further information on DRM, and how it can be applied to
the different formats of eBooks, check out these two helpful posts:

* [The Official Library Site for Digital Rights Management](http://www.drm.uk.com/)
* [Wikipedias DRM information for eBooks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_rights_management#E-books)

## Purchasing an ISBN

Standing for International Standard Book Number, an ISBN is a unique
identifier for every book that is sold. ISBNs are crucial if you plan to make
your book available on retailing channels or stores.

An ISBN is made up of the following sections:

* A "978" prefix
* A number to identify a group or country associated with the book
* A number to identify the publisher of the book
* The title identifier, which is for a particular title or edition of your book
* The final number is a "check digit", which validates the ISBN.

You actually need ISBNs for different formats of the same book, so in all
likelihood you will end up needing a maximum of five ISBN numbers for a single
book:

* Hardcover
* Paperback
* Amazon Kindle eBook format
* ePub eBook format
* PDF format

If you’re only distributing your book on a personal website you could possibly
make do without an ISBN, but we’d advise having one just in case, as it always
makes things easier if your book ever becomes popular.

The majority of publishers or digital publishers will provide an ISBN free of
charge. If you are going down the self-publishing route, you can buy your own
ISBN for under £100 quite easily from many different publishing websites.

### Where to buy your own ISBNs in the UK

* ####[Myidentifiers.com](https://www.myidentifiers.com/isbn/main)

  Though it’s expensive for a single ISBN ($125), we’ve shown you that in all
  likelihood you’re going to need more than one! This website has a fantastic
  offer of 10 ISBNs for $250, making it the perfect choice for ISBN purchasing.

## Creating a barcode for your book

<img src="/img/barcode.png" class="align-right" />
The barcodes on the back of books are actually just an
ISBN in scannable form. These will again be supplied by any publisher you sign
with, or by the vast majority of digital publishers if you go down the
assisted self-publishing route.

If you’re aiming to self-publish then you’ll need to purchase your own
barcodes. A company we’ve seen suggested numerous times is
Barcodegraphics.com, where you can [purchase the necessary barcode for around
$10](http://www.barcodegraphics.com/BarcodeEPS_order.php) in a process that
takes only a few minutes.

Once you register, you’ll be taken to a products page. You should see the
third heading says ‘Books’ and the top option is the barcode you want,
‘Bookland EAN’.

## Writing a good bio

An author biography is your chance to get the reader to open your book and
find out more details. A bio done badly can be a book-killer; not many readers
are going to give a book a chance if the author’s introduction makes them
yawn.

[Check out this guide for brilliant
tips](http://mjroseblog.typepad.com/buzz_balls_hype/2009/02/guest-blogger-
barry-eisler-on-its-the-marketing-stupid.html) on what your author bio is for,
and how to get the most out of it

## Now you’re good to go

Your book should now be nigh-on ready to go! If there’s anything you’re still
concerned about then drop us an email and we’ll look at getting the guide
updated. Whichever choice of publishing you decide to proceed with, the best
of luck to you and your soon-to-be bestseller.