---
layout: default
title: Chapter 4 - Marketing Your Book
---

# 4 - Marketing

Regardless of how you choose to pursue your own book, you’ll need to have the
basics in place. If you’ve not already, pop to chapter 1 and check out how to
prepare your own book (link to chapter 1).

So, you need to market your book! Unfortunately, marketing is really hard
work...

Worse yet, marketing in a competitive environment is harder work...

Marketing as an unknown author in the highly competitive book-selling
environment is even tougher still!

Until you’re a renowned novelist or have the financial backing of a large
publisher, it’s going to be a major part of your time. However, all is not
lost, and there are numerous methods available to get your book seen by the
masses.

We’ve searched far and wide for the best advice and tips of getting your book
heard about. Please remember when approaching our comprehensive list below, it
is far better to do a few of these book marketing tips well, than do them all
moderately.

## First things first, who are you marketing to?.

Aimless marketing may as well be money down the drain, and it is absolutely
crucial to target the right individuals. [Here are a few detailed pointers](ht
tp://www.authorhouse.com/AuthorResources/Marketing/Plan/Target.aspx) to help
identify and understand your target audience before the marketing process even
begins.

## Marketing your book online...

### Book marketing tip 1: Set up your own author’s website

A personal author’s website is such an important marketing tool that
publishers actively look for, and encourage, authors to have their own online
presence. A website helps people find out about you, what you’ve written, what
inspires you and anything else their heart desires.

<img src="/img/wordpress.png" class="align-right" />
If you’re a technophobe we’d definitely advise using a
[blogging solution called WordPress](http://wordpress.com/), which has made
creating your own blog a cinch. They hold your hand at every stage of the
website-creation to make sure you get everything set up smoothly.

There’s a large and active community behind WordPress that means if you get
stuck at any stage, help won’t be far away.

####Search Engine Optimisation

We won’t go into the specifics of how to optimise your website, but if you
look at pursuing it independently we highly recommend reading up on a topic
called “Search Engine Optimisation”, often referred to as SEO. This will help
your website rank well in search engines, helping you get visibility and
visits for people looking for your author name or book.

[Start simple - the great Beginner’s Guide to SEO](http://www.seomoz.org
/beginners-guide-to-seo)

### Activities for your own website

Just stop and think for a moment about why people would come to an author's
website...

To learn about the author? To see either newly released books or the rest of
your writings? To get in touch about possible event or marketing
opportunities? Or simply just to say how much they enjoyed the book?

You need to ensure that your website addresses the needs of the masses, and a
great place to start is to visit other authors and see the kind of features
they provide. The bare minimum your website should provide is:

* Regularly checking up on the comments and discussions with your readers. 
* Occasional articles or posts to keep the website fresh. These can be on topics like your existing work, or up and coming features
* A ‘library’ of your existing work, with links to where they can be purchased
* Contact and social details for those looking to get in touch, such as Twitter accounts, email addresses etc

Once these basics are in place you can look at expanding the features of your
website and really providing some great unique content and options.

### Bonus suggestions for your own author blog

####Competitions.

Offering anything from a small number of your eBooks free, to signed editions
of a hard copy, are great rewards for fans showing an interest in your
website.

If you actually become a bestseller you’ll even have the small things like
“the notepad my first book was drafted in” etc, which are all valuable assets.

If you can make any contest amusing then all the better, since people are much
more likely to share things they find funny.

### Video / audio features

People turn out in their hundreds to see established authors read passages
from their works and there’s no reason you can’t do the same with podcasts or
videos on your website.

Something as simple as you reading the first chapter of your book can serve as
a taster to prospective readers as well as an interesting discussion piece.
Reading a page or two at a time cuts down on the time you’ll spend correcting
errors and you can either upload it to your page as small audio segments or
use a sound editing program to compile it into one file. If you really want to
spread your influence you can also consider videoing this and posting to your
Youtube channel.

## Book marketing tip 2: Start a mailing list

Your website can also harvest details of your fans and readers, giving you
ways of contacting them that aren’t directly through your website. Building
your own email list of interested fans is a very good way of keeping
information flowing to those that really care about it, and is relatively easy
to do.

With upcoming releases, book discussions and competitions just a few of the
many emailing possibilities out there, the earlier you can start populating
your signup list the better.

Thankfully, adding a signup bar to your website is incredibly simple with just
a small bit of code or the addition of a widget. There are loads of great
email service providers out there that are free, up to a certain level of
subscribers, meaning you can start growing your list without any cash
investment.

<img src="/img/mailchimp.png" class="align-left" />
Look around for email service providers that you are
comfortable using. If you trust our recommendations, we suggest you give
[Mailchimp](http://mailchimp.com) a try. It’s free up to 2,000 subscribers in
their Forever Free plan, and you barely lose any functionality from the paid
options. Overall, a fantastic choice for starting your email activities.

[Check out MailChimp here](http://mailchimp.com)

## Book marketing tip 3: Have a social media presence

The world has become social, and having an online presence that talks,
comments and is readily approachable is a great feature.

<img src="/img/twitter.png" class="align-right" />
### Twitter

We recommend at the very least having a Twitter account
linked to your author name. Twitter opens up the world of hashtag topics and
trends, meaning you can easily bring together any fans who are tweeting about
your topic. An account is free and easily monitorable from any web-connected
device, so you’ve got no reason not to have one!

These hashtag chats are a great way to get in touch with people who are active
in different areas. There is a publicly available [list of hashtags](https://d
ocs.google.com/a/stinkyink.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AhisaMy5TGiwcnVhejNHWnZlT3
NvWFVPT3Q4NkIzQVE#gid=0) here that you can use to find people active in your
field.

A couple of tags that we’d recommend following and/or getting involved with
are [#ePrdctn](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23ePrdctn) and
[#storycraft](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23storycraft).

[#ePrdctn](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23ePrdctn) is a channel for all
kinds of discussions about the processes of creating an eBook.
[#storycraft](https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23storycraft) is a great place
for fiction writers to get a bit of assistance with the forging of their
worlds. It’s well worth scanning down the list and seeing if there’s a chat
set up that may contain at least part of your target audience.

### Facebook

A Facebook page is another minimum requirement that is free and beneficial.
With the introduction of [Facebook
timeline](http://www.facebook.com/about/timeline), your entire author's life
and publishing history and success stories are readily available.

<img class="align-right" src="img/fbstar.jpg" >

An author's Facebook page is also a great way to push new releases, with the
ability to “star” new events to make them the full width of your page and act
as a mini headline.

Star the post and it becomes a header-like post that dominates your page and
acts as an announcement.

### Google +

Google+ is another area you might wish to invest time in. It’s a relatively
new social network, so it’s not as large as Twitter and Facebook, but it does
allow easy sharing of content with friends-of-friends, which allows great
content (like your book!) to reach the eyes of people you’d never normally be
able to reach.

### Social Competitions

If you decide to run a competition on your website then don’t forget to let
the masses know via your social accounts! Once word of mouth spreads your
competition can really take off.

Be aware of the guidelines for post competitions on
[Twitter](https://support.twitter.com/articles/68877-guidelines-for-contests-
on-twitter) and [Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/promotions_guidelines.php)
as they’ll affect the choices available for you. There’s some nice [advice on
running a Twitter competition](http://billbolmeier.com/run-contest-twitter/)
here.

## Book marketing tip 4: Get social on dedicated websites

We’ve mentioned it numerous times in this guide, but the
[Goodreads](http://goodreads.com) website is a fantastic community of avid
readers whom could not make it any clearer they love books and want to be
involved in reading-related activites as much as possible.

Whether you want their reading suggestions or not, head to their website and
create a new account (it’s free). Once you’re done, either [follow this
link](http://www.goodreads.com/group) or click on the top navigation on their
website to get to the Goodreads Group page.

Welcome... to information!

You can search by category, name, author, discussion group, literally anything
the heart desires. On a researching level this is perfect, but once your name
becomes more established you can set up discussion groups and events based
around you as an author, and your works.

[Start your Goodreads account now](http://goodreads.com)

## Book marketing tip 5: You have your own blog, now use others

A great way to build a name for yourself in the blogosphere is to write guest
posts for other websites.

These posts can be anything you’re comfortable writing about that another blog
would be interested in, and focusing on your strengths and experience as a
“soon-to-be best selling author” is a great place to start. For example,
writing tips or even previous experiences if you’re already published, is
content which writing blogs will always love.

Finding these opportunities is pretty effortless at first. A quick and
effective method is a Google search for “ *your genre* blogs” which will
return numerous blogs that Google feel are relevant to your genre.

Couple this with any contacts or active social accounts you find on Twitter or
Facebook (more of that below) and you’ll have plenty of people to get involved
with.

[StumbleUpon](http://stumbleupon.com) and [Technorati](http://technorati.com)
can help you find related blogs, though they are slightly more long winded
methods than just searching Google intelligently.

All of the features you provide on your own website, such as podcasts, video
interviews etc, can be taken and applied to the content other websites want.
Once you’ve got a few out there, you’ll find enquiries come in and certain
websites actually make requests of you, which can only be good for your book.

## Book marketing tip 6: Internet advertising

Our previously discussed methods of marketing can give you word of mouth and
awareness similar to advertising, and is all but free once you allow for the
time it takes. Advertising is not, but it does allow you to get your product
in front of people instantly.

As such, this is one of the riskier options and should only be undertaken by
either an author with cash to burn that can afford an external company, or
someone with the experience and knowhow to do it individually.

Internet advertising has made targeting an incredibly powerful tool. If you
want to get your message in front of people viewing certain websites, or
searching Google for specific keywords, you can!

If you’re new to the world of internet advertising we highly recommend you
employ a Pay Per Click (PPC) company to do this for you as, going solo, one
simple mistake may cost you thousands. Anything from an incorrectly set
budget, to poor negative keywords, can be catastrophic for your bank account,
and we’d advise you either start studying popular advertising platforms such
as [Google Adwords](http://www.google.co.uk/intl/en/adwords/jumpstart/uksmb-11
11.html#sourceid=awo&subid=uk-en-ha-aw_bkws&medium=ha&term=%2Bgoogleadwords)
and [Google Adsense](http://www.google.co.uk/intl/en_GB/ads/publisher/#subid=ww-en-et-adsense-pubsollink) or look for recommended companies to do it for
you.

### Marketing your book in the real world

It's important to remember that, while the internet provides important
outreach opportunities, sometimes going out and meeting real people will
generate much needed interest in your work.

We’ve made a list of some of the activities you might consider for your “real
world” marketing. Remember these are just a few ideas; there are hundreds of
opportunities that will be specific to your combination of subject matter,
location and the nature of your publication.

## Book marketing tip 7: Traditional advertising

Unless you’re signing with a major publisher we would suggest avoiding
traditional advertising. Out of your own pocket it will be exorbitantly
expensive with likely minimal returns.

Your time (and money) will be far better spent advertising YOURSELF in the
following ways, or investing in the online methods we’ve previously discussed.

## Book Marketing Tip 8: Get around

Research local events then find and attend wherever possible any reading
groups or book clubs. If you’re confident enough in the quality of your book
you can even go as far as providing free copies of your books to these groups
and inviting/encouraging feedback.

Take this a stage further and try to create your own group, possibly at a
local library or somewhere topical, such as a local youth club if your book is
targeted towards their demographic.

Once your book is out and about, try your best to arrange book signings or
readings wherever possible. Agents and/or publishers will likely be able to
assist getting you into the major outlets, but smaller, dedicated book stores
and websites are easy enough to contact and there’s no shame in pitching
yourself.

## Book marketing tip 9: Nothing is ever enough

Even with everything in this guide, you’re going to need more! As a wise
business man once said, you have to keep running to stand still in this fast
paced world. Due to that, we’ll update below with some fascinating or
recommended marketing tips as we encounter them, giving you something to refer
to if you’re ever looking for that next bright spark.

* ####[AuthorHouse Guide to Book Marketing](http://www.authorhouse.com/AuthorResources/Marketing.aspx)

  A must read for those serious about marketing their book. An amazing resource
  with creative thoughts and approaches to nigh on any form of marketing or
  advice for your book.

* ####[Self Publishing a book: 25 things to know](http://reviews.cnet.com/self-publishing/)

  This article has some all round advice that is great for those new to the area
  of publishing. There’s some fascinating marketing comments in point 18 that
  are well worth considering.

* ####[iUniverse Book Marketing Guide](http://www.iuniverse.com/ExpertAdvice/MarketingYourBook/Default.aspx)

  A nice little hub of information to give you some key pointers and tips on
  marketing your new book.
